refactor(): Refactor of the Inputs and Outputs page (#309)
mia-platform/documentation: docs/fast_data/inputs_and_outputs.md

sidebar_label: Inputs and Outputs
---

The fast-data has an Event Driven Architecture, as such there are many events that make everything work. In this page we will explore these events in detail to understand better the whole fast-data lifecycle.

## Projection

Here, we will discuss the inputs and outputs related to the Projection management.

### Ingestion Message

**System**: Apache Kafka

> **Producer**: The CDC Connectors of the source databases

Author: Put also list of consumers with link to configurations

sidebar_label: Inputs and Outputs
---

> The fast-data has an Event Driven Architecture, as such there are many events that make everything work. In this page we will explore these events in detail to understand better the whole fast-data lifecycle.

Reviewer: Better call it _Fast Data_ instead of _fast-data_. I'd suggest this:

```suggestion
The Fast Data ecosystems has an Event Driven Architecture, as such there are many events that make everything work. In this page we will explore these events in detail to understand better the whole fast-data lifecycle.
```

sidebar_label: Inputs and Outputs
---

The Fast Data has an Event Driven Architecture, as such there are many events that make everything work. In this page we will explore these events in detail to understand better the whole Fast Data lifecycle.

## Projection

Here, we will discuss the inputs and outputs related to the Projection management.

### Ingestion Message

**Channel**: Apache Kafka

**Topic naming convention**: `<tenant>.<environment>.<source-system>.<projection>.ingestion`

Example: `test-tenant.PROD.system-name.test-projection.ingestion`

**Producer**: The CDC Connectors of the source databases

**Consumer**: Real Time Updater

**Description**: The ingestion message is the message that allows us to mantain the Projections synchronized with the Source Databases since it contains the data of each record that gets inserted, updated or deleted.

When entering our systems, the message is read by the [Kafka Message Adapter](/fast_data/configuration/realtime_updater/common.md#kafka-adapters-kafka-messages-format) of the Real Time Updater, which uses it to update the Projections.

> Based on how the ingestion system is set up, the format can be one of three possible types:

Reviewer 2: @ianFar96 qui ci manca il debezium

Author: no, c'è ma è collassato da github perche non l'ho cambiato
![image](https://github.com/mia-platform/documentation/assets/30315670/40d1210f-da89-461d-abe8-39eaaacd4799)

Reviewer 2: ah sorry, my bad

You can also specify a [custom adapter](/fast_data/configuration/realtime_updater/common.md#custom) to handle any other message formats you need.
This format is always configurable in the System of Records page on the console, on the _Real Time Updater_ tab.

Here's the AsyncApi specification of the message and some examples of the different formats.

#### IBM InfoSphere Data Replication for DB2

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.6.0
info:
  title: Data Change API
  version: 1.0.0
channels:
  DB2:
    publish:
      message:
        name: DB2 data change message
        payload:
          type: object
          required:
            - key
            - value
            - timestamp

>             - offset

Author: Remove this in all messages as kafka puts it as default

                source:
                  type: object
                  description: Metadata about the origin of the message (db, table, query...)
                  additionalProperties: true
              additionalProperties: false
          additionalProperties: false
```
</p>
</details>

Examples:

<details><summary>Insert operation</summary>
<p>

```json
{
  "key": {
    "USER_ID": 123,
    "TAX_CODE": "ABCDEF12B02M100O"
  },
  "value": {
    "op": "c",
    "before": null,
    "after": {
      "USER_ID": 123,
      "TAX_CODE": "the-fiscal-code-123",
      "COINS": 300000000
    }
  }
}
```
</p>
</details>

<details><summary>Delete operation</summary>
<p>

```json
{
  "key": {
    "USER_ID": 123,
    "TAX_CODE": "ABCDEF12B02M100O"
  },
  "value": {
    "op": "d",
    "before": {
      "USER_ID": 123,
      "TAX_CODE": "the-fiscal-code-123",
      "COINS": 300000000
    },
    "after": null
  }
}
```
</p>
</details>

### Projection Update Message

**Channel**: Apache Kafka

**Topic naming convention**: `<tenant>.<environment>.<mongo-database>.<collection>.pr-update`

Example: `test-tenant.PROD.restaurants-db.reviews-collection.pr-update`

**Producer**: Real Time Updater

> **Consumer**: Single View Trigger Generator or Single View Creator (sv-patch)

Reviewer 2: Let's add the link to the doc of the SV-Patch

{
  "key": {
    "USER_ID": 123,
    "TAX_CODE": "ABCDEF12B02M100O"
  },
  "value": null,
  "timestamp": "1234556789",
  "offset": 100
}
```

#### Oracle Golden Gate

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.6.0
info:
  title: Data Change API
  version: "1.0.0"
channels:
  GoldenGate:
    publish:
      message:
        name: Golden Gate data change message
        payload:
          type: object
          required:
            - key
            - value
            - timestamp
            - offset
          properties:
            key: 
              type: string
              description: String of the primary keys values joined by underscores
              examples:
                - pkValue1_pkValue2
            value:
              type: object
              additionalProperties: false
              required:
                - op_type

>                 - pos

Author: pos could be not required if internal counter is timestamp

Reviewer: I guess the internal counter is always defined via timestamp. `pos` will be anyway included in a message sent via Golden Gate CDC. I think is fine to leave it there.

              properties:
                op_type:
                  type: string
                  description: Operation type. Can be *insert*, *update* or *delete*
                  enum:
                    - I
                    - U
                    - D
                before:
                  type: object
                  description: Whole record **before** the changes were applied (including the primary and foreign keys). This field is not defined with insert operation
                  additionalProperties: true
                after:
                  type: object
                  description: Whole record **after** the changes were applied (including the primary and foreign keys). This field is not defined with delete operation

>                   additionalProperties: true

Author: Put if then else based on the op_type

Author: I believe it would complicate the readability more than being helpful, also other adapter don't have the op_type property so in the sake of coherence I'll leave it like that.

                pos:
                  type: integer
                  description: Position of the message, similar to the kafka message's offset
            timestamp:
              type: integer
              description: Kafka message Unix timestamp
            offset:
              type: integer
              description: Kafka message offset
          additionalProperties: false
```

Insert operation:

```json
{
  "key": "123",
  "value": {
    "op_type": "I",
    "before": null,
    "after": {
      "USER_ID": 123,
      "TAX_CODE": "the-fiscal-code-123",
      "COINS": 300000000
    }
  },
  "timestamp": "1234556789",
  "offset": 100
}
```

Delete operation:

```json
{
  "key": "123",
  "value": {
    "op_type": "D",
    "before": {
      "USER_ID": 123,
      "TAX_CODE": "the-fiscal-code-123",
      "COINS": 300000000
    },
    "after": null
  },
  "timestamp": "1234556789",

>   "offset": 100

Author: Remove these also

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.6.0
info:
  title: Data Change API
  version: 1.0.0
channels:
  Debezium:
    publish:
      message:
        name: Debezium data change message
        payload:
          type: object
          required:
            - key
            - value
            - timestamp
            - offset
          properties:
            key: 
              type: object
              description: Record's primary keys
              additionalProperties: true
            value:
              type: object
              required:
                - op
                - source
              properties:
                op:
                  type: string

>                   description: Operation type. Can be *create/snapshot(r)*, *update* or *delete*

Reviewer: (t)runcate messages?

(despite the fact we do not support them)

>                   description: Operation type. Can be *create/snapshot(r)*, *update* or *delete*
>                   enum:
>                     - c
>                     - r
>                     - u
>                     - d
>                 before:

Reviewer: (t)runcate messages? (despite we do not suppor them
```suggestion
                  description: Operation type. Can be *create/snapshot(r)*, *update*, *truncate* (not supported by Fast Data) or *delete*
                  enum:
                    - c
                    - r
                    - u
                    - d
                    - t
                before:
```)

Author: I didn't put it on purpose so the user understands that if he wants to drop a whole table he needs to do it by deleting each record one by one, otherwise the RTU won't do anything

Reviewer: Smart. I'm still unsure about it but it seems reasonable since we're explaining what we are expecting from the user.

{
  "key": {
    "USER_ID": 123,
    "TAX_CODE": "ABCDEF12B02M100O"
  },
  "value": {
    "op": "d",
    "before": {
      "USER_ID": 123,
      "TAX_CODE": "the-fiscal-code-123",
      "COINS": 300000000
    },
    "after": null
  },
  "timestamp": "1234556789",
  "offset": 100
}
```

#### Topic naming convention

> `<tenant>.<environment>.<source-system>.<projection>.ingestion`

Reviewer: We should notify that this is the suggested convention (and default one when creating projections via Console)

Author: I would keep it as an affirmation to have as much people as possible follow our standards, if they do they can benefit from the defaults created by the console and whatever automatisms we will create with time. If we put suggested maybe more people won't bother following them and we may incur to bugs (like the problems we had with the pr-updates)

      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Topic naming convention
`<tenant>.<environment>.<mongo-database>.<collection>.pr-update`

Example: `test-tenant.PROD.restaurants-db.reviews-collection.pr-update`

## Single View

This section covers the inputs and outputs concerning the Single View's aggregation.

### Projection Changes

> **System**: MongoDB

Author: Can also be sent to kafka (Gio will provide you with some examples) with the GENERATE_KAFKA_PROJECTION_CHANGES env var

> **System**: MongoDB

Author: Replace system with channel

      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Topic naming convention
`<tenant>.<environment>.<mongo-database>.<collection>.pr-update`

Example: `test-tenant.PROD.restaurants-db.reviews-collection.pr-update`

## Single View

This section covers the inputs and outputs concerning the Single View's aggregation.

### Projection Changes

**Channel**: MongoDB

> <!-- TODO: Add the SVTG when ready -->

Author: It was misleading the comment, i changed it with: `<!-- TODO: Add the SVTG when it will be able to generate projection changes too -->`

This event is created as a result of a strategy execution.
It is stored on MongoDB and is very similar to the [Single View Trigger Message](#single-view-trigger-message) on Kafka.

**JsonSchema specification**:
```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "required": [
    "identifier",
    "changes",
    "createdAt"
  ],
  "properties": {
    "type": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Identifier of for the Single View Creator service that should take care of the changes"
    },
    "identifier": {
      "type": "object",
      "description": "Identifier of the Projection Changes that should match with the Single View Keys fields or the identifierQueryMapping ones from the aggregation.json",
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "changes": {
      "type": "array",
      "description": "Array that keeps track of the changes requested for the Single View related to the identifier",
      "items": {
        "type": "object",
        "required": [
          "state"
        ],
        "properties": {
          "state": {
            "type": "string",
            "enum": [
              "NEW",
              "IN_PROGRESS"

>             ],

Reviewer: I should review this, but isn't there an `ERROR` state?

Author: very nice catch! yes there is.

      }
    }
  }
}
```
</p>
</details>

## Single View

This section covers the inputs and outputs concerning the Single View's aggregation.

### Projection Changes

**Channel**: MongoDB

**Producer**: Real Time Updater

**Consumer**: Single View Creator

> **Description**: The Projection Changes or `pc` informs the listener (generally the Single View Creator) that a Single View should be updated.

Reviewer 2: I would add to the description that this event is generated only when the env var (which I don't remember the name) is set to MONGO instead of KAFKA

Author: I believe you're confusing it with the env of the Single View Creator which tells the service from where to read the projection changes (mongo or kafka). The projection changes itself are always emmitted by the RTU unless it is explicitly disabled with the `PROJECTIONS_CHANGES_ENABLED` set to `false`

Reviewer 2: yep you are right, I was confusing it with the SVC

    subscribe:
      message:
        name: Single View Trigger message
        payload:
          type: object
          required:
            - key
            - value
            - timestamp
            - offset
          properties:
            key:
              type: object
              description: Identifier of the Single View or the Projection (depending on the value.type)
              additionalProperties: true
            value:
              type: object
              required:
                - type
                - __internal__kafkaInfo
                - change
              properties:
                type:
                  type: string
                  description: Type of change requested. Aggregation means the Single View must be regenerated, patch means an update must be done among all Single Views matching a certain query
                  enum:
                    - aggregation
                    - patch
                singleViewIdentifier:
                  type: object
                  description: Identifier of the Single View just like the Projection Changes Identifier. Mind that this field will be set only in case of type aggregation and not patch

>                   additionalProperties: true

Author: put if then else here also

  "changes": [
    {
      "state": "NEW",
      "topic": "original-topic-2",
      "timestamp": 1234567,
      "partition": 0,
      "offset": 2,
      "key": {
        "originalKey2": "123",
      }
    }
  ],
  "createdAt": "2022-05-20T10:25:35.656Z",
  "updatedAt": "2022-05-20T10:25:35.656Z",
  "doneAt": "2022-05-20T10:25:35.656Z"
}
```
</p>
</details>

### Kafka Projection Changes

**Channel**: Apache Kafka

**Producer**: Real Time Updater

**Consumer**: Single View Creator

**Description**: Projection changes can also be sent to kafka when enabling the GENERATE_KAFKA_PROJECTION_CHANGES environment variable in the Real Time Updater.

:::caution

> This method is not recommended since it has some performance downsides and it still needs to save the projection changes on MongoDB. It is being mantained for backwards compatibility reasons but will be deprecated when possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method is not recommended since it has some performance downsides and needs to save the projection changes on MongoDB. It is being maintained for backward compatibility but will be deprecated in future releases.
```
